everybody welcome to another episode of
conversations with tom i'm here with
author and neuroscientist david eagleman
david welcome to the show man
awesome to see you tom dude i'm super
stoked to have you back on anytime that
i get to research you with like the
specific purpose of you coming on i'm a
very happy man uh your new book live
wired i think is really extraordinary
and i wanna so i'm haunted by a quote
and that quote is genius is a young
man's game
you never use that quote in the book but
you touch on the subject in terms of how
much ability we have to change and learn
as we get older and
i want to pinpoint just like i really
want to feel like i can get better and
better as i age and that i'm not going
to suffer the slings and arrows of you
know sort of crystallizing into dogma or
not being able to learn and push myself
how changeable is the brain
so the good news is the brain remains
flexible all through adulthood which is
why you can learn new names new people
and new facts and so on so it's not that
plasticity shuts down but it does
diminish
but
i actually want to address this for a
second because i feel like this is a
really important area which is that as
all of us get older we sort of lament
this we think oh we would love to have
the flexibility of a young brain but in
fact i think you would not and here's
why
although you'd be able to learn chinese
you know in a few weeks instead of a
year or whatever it's um
the hardening of your brain actually
represents that you're doing something
right your your brain's job is to make
an internal model of the external world
and it's trying to figure out okay what
is my language what's my culture what's
the beliefs of my society how do i
interact with people such that they
respond to me in the right way what is
my internal model of my spouse's
behavior all these kinds of things
and if you somehow could take a magic
pill that returned you to the
flexibility of an infant's brain you
would forget all of that you wouldn't be
you you wouldn't be tom anymore you'd be
you'd be an infant again you'd have to
relearn life again
so let me let me push you on that if i
could get the flexibility but not wipe
the slate clean
would there be advantages to that or
this cold war for resources that the
brain is sort of engaged in does that
become so problematic that it becomes
hard to solidify the self
yeah i mean
so let me just jump to the first thing i
think there's not a way of doing the
flexibility without losing yourself
why is that from is there a
physiological like the brain structure
becomes just too squishy
like what's happening
it's that who you are
is the sum total of all of the
experiences you've ever had you know you
mean at the end of the book i i sort of
suggest that you are a a vessel each of
us is a vessel of space and time where
you were born in a particular town at a
particular year you go around you vacuum
up your experiences i i was born in a
different town in a different year i go
around i vacuum up my little experiences
and um and that's what makes us us
and if you got rid of that and said you
know i want to forget all that and start
over
you there wouldn't be anything about you
anymore i mean maybe you would learn
chinese and you'd have a different name
you'd be a different person whatever you
have to learn everything over again
it's interesting so one of the things
that um
so i think a lot about death you covered
this in an interview that i was
listening to um about i forget who you
were quoting but man lives two lives one
sort of when he has no sense of his
mortality and then the second one once
he becomes aware of that and i really
think in the last 12 months i've become
aware of my mortality and i don't know
if it's just the the age so anybody
that's been watching me for a while will
see that my rhetoric used to be really
hardcore i'm trying to live forever
and when i really i stopped to ask from
an evolutionary standpoint why don't we
live forever there are jellyfish that
can do it
and it is sort of what you're talking
about now where the jellyfish sort of
re-enters it's not a pupa stage but
something like that where it sort of
like blobs back out and then sort of
rebuilds itself
and
renewal was the answer that i came up
with in terms of why we don't live
forever
because you know the the old adage of
science advances funeral by funeral
because you need that sense of renewal
and change for a society to work so a
society certainly doesn't care about any
one individual
um
is
is that part of when you think about
neuroplasticity like every time i hear
you say you don't want to get to that
level of flexibility you sound crazy to
me
and i keep thinking it's because you
understand something about the way
neuroplasticity works that i don't so
walk us through like the fundamental
reality of what neuroplasticity is and i
think one thing that is interesting is
that notion that the regions of the
brain are actually competing against one
another which i had never heard until
reading live wired yeah okay great yeah
well
i mean one of the things i've tried to
do in livewire is propose completely new
frameworks about how to think about all
this so i'm glad i mean you wouldn't
have heard this before livewire because
i feel like
at least my hope with this is it's a
completely new way of of looking at the
brain
um okay so there's a lot to unpack in in
your
question i'll say a few things actually
let me just start with the the quotation
uh just in case anyone wants is it's
it's from confucius and he said yeah man
lives two lives the second one begins
when he realizes he has just one
um
and i agree with you about this whole uh
immortality thing it may be that there
is a
evolutionary basis to this which is
mother nature does a lot of work to
figure out okay what do i need to do to
make a species successful and it may be
that part of that is figuring out okay
how long do i make them live in order
for this species to to be really
successful obviously it's not
cast that way from other nation's point
of view it's just an evolutionary issue
but um some species do better than
others if they have the right turnover
rate um
uh in terms of in terms of death okay so
you asked what can i just go back to say
what neuroplasticity is it's that your
whole life your brain is changing you've
got
you know most of your listeners
probably know this but you've got 86
billion neurons you've got
0.2 quadrillion connections between
these neurons and your whole life every
moment these things are changing their
strength they're unplugging they're
re-plugging these the neurons the cells
in their brain are seeking they're
actually moving around and trying
different things out each one has about
10 000 connections with its neighbors
the interesting part is
your whole life this is what's happening
which means you are a slightly different
person than who you were when you
started this podcast five minutes ago
and and and i am too and um so this is
what i mean
when i'm talking about the flexibility
of the brain now the argot of the field
we call this brain plasticity
um but the fact is i think we need a new
term because the reason it got that name
a century ago is because plastic you can
mold into shape and it holds that shape
but what the brain's doing is so much
more than simply holding onto a shape
it's constantly re-configuring itself
and so that's why i introduced the term
live wired which i
do to distinguish how we think about
everything in silicon valley which is
hardware and software
where you make these trim and efficient
two layers and they interact with each
other livewear is constantly actually
it's like a living electric fabric it's
you know
unplugging and replugging and changing
itself and getting things down into the
system
now back to your question
about
um you know as you get older the thing
is you've been plugging things down into
the system your whole life
and uh the longer it goes the deeper
that gets into the system and that's why
i'm skeptical about this idea of
returning to plasticity of a of a child
because the way learning works in the
brain is everything builds on
what you already know so it's not like a
computer where you give it some piece of
information it stores a little file it's
not like that it's instead everything
you learn is in the context of what you
have already known
so just as an example if you and i were
learning how to
fly a
b212 helicopter you might think about in
terms of like oh okay i get it this is
sort of like a motorcycle i lean this
way i might think about in terms of a
horse like okay yeah i grew up riding
horses so here's how i do it and here's
how i think about it but it's all
predicated on what we've known before
yeah i
i heard you destroy my fantasy which is
one day we will be like the matrix and
we can download stuff and you introduce
that level of complexity where it's like
learning doesn't actually work like that
and you have to think of these things as
as existing in these different layers in
the brain and that we're essentially
synthesizing machines which i've always
said to myself in in a derogatory way
because i look at somebody like elon
musk and he seems to be truly thinking
sort of in a unique way whereas i've
always felt like i have to take in all
this data and then it bounces around in
my mind in a unique way but it isn't
sort of truly
from the ground up a unique insight and
that may just be
me looking at it incorrectly and
everybody is a synthesizing machine
but that
reality of the way that we take in data
and then i've always thought of it sort
of as a pinball machine where it comes
in and it hits something else which then
bumps into something else and then it
re-congeals into this sort of new and
unique idea
but that's interesting and it it becomes
it becomes somewhat trouble troubling
and you have a quote in the book i
forget the exact words but basically
you're
everyone is born as many men but die as
one
and that notion of you have all this
infinite possibility you could could
have been born anywhere at any time
encounter anything but ultimately you
become one very specific person
and because i'm in sort of the mindset
space i encounter people that have
childhood trauma a lot
and the way that childhood trauma shapes
them i find really distressing
and
this is my obsession around this notion
of i don't
i don't want to be a slave to my past
so i acknowledge how important it is but
how much can we
begin to push beyond that like if if
we're at you know a 10 in terms of
malleability when we're young are we at
like a 0.5 when we're 70 or like where
are we where are we at
well i'll tell you something in this
context this is something i've been
thinking about a ton
which is
okay let me explain
why we don't change as much as we grow
older it's because
you are getting a good model of the
world with which you're
successful and so there's no particular
motivation to change further now i
happen to know that you and i both love
the idea of continuing to change trying
as hard as we can to do that all the
time but it's not the general story most
people find let's say just a career and
they figure out how to do it and they
learn all the vocabulary of their career
and they figure out great this is this
is what i'm doing and um unfortunately a
lot of people when they retire their
lives really shrink
and then they
are not challenging their brain in any
way
here's why that matters it's because
when you challenge your brain you're
building new bridges and roadways all
the time and as people get older of
course their brain tissue actually
starts to degenerate so you need to
build those new bridges to cover broken
roadways or else you're really in
trouble
and you may have heard the story about
these nuns who when they
um
when they died they gave their brain an
autopsy for analysis and it turned out
that some fraction of these nuns who'd
lived in the convents until the day they
died
they had alzheimer's disease but nobody
knew it when they were alive because
they didn't have the cognitive deficits
and so it turns out it's because living
in a convent you've got other people to
deal with and tours and responsibilities
and other things and so they
were able to build new bridges all the
time so anyway this is one of the most
um
important things that we can do with our
brains now uh i'm trying to remember
what was the what was the connection to
the thing we said before this is about
how far you can push yourself so i'm
gonna i'm gonna go now into uh a
direction that means a lot to me so
when you think about your kids so i know
you have kids are you like [__] i'm
going to introduce them to everything
that might be meaningful i'm going to
have them playing piano because the way
that the brain will drink in music and
reorganize itself is going to matter i'm
going to have them doing sports because
obviously that's going to lay certain
foundations that they won't be able to
lay later like how
critical
is that developmental period like if if
i'm gonna be a good steward i don't have
kids you have to worry about me i'm not
gonna you know [__] anybody up but like
how i would really sweat that like i
would really worry that i either haven't
done enough to sort of lay important
foundations or i've done too much like
how do you think about making the most
of that plastic period yeah i'll tell
you so my father was a psychiatrist and
he had actually prepped me for this a
while ago he said he said look the the
view of modern psychiatry is that the
most important thing a parent can do is
open doors uh for their children that's
that's it meaning you give the kid piano
lessons and soccer lessons and this and
that and chess and blah blah but you
can't kids
kids already start having personalities
very young and they love this but they
hate that and so on the best you can do
is give the kids the opportunity and the
other thing that's so important is just
teaching kids
creativity and by that i simply mean
teaching them
how to
consume lots of data and then remix and
do their own versions of it because the
the way that schools often go wrong is
by teaching lots of stuff and then the
semester ends and that's it like okay
now you know all the different ways that
these painters painted or all the
different ways of electrical engineering
that you can do this and that but the
important part is you should add a week
to the end of that
where you say to the kids okay now i
want you to
bend break and blend all these painting
styles and come up with your own now i
want you to come up with an engineering
project that you care about that you've
thought of that incorporates everything
we've learned in this semester so that's
i would say the main thing i'm trying to
do as a parent is make sure that
whatever my kids learn i turn it into
something where they're leveraging it
they're using it so that knowledge
becomes not just a an endpoint but a
springboard
so do you think of it in terms of
because after reading the book i walked
away thinking this way
all of us are going to make when we're
young accidentally or on purpose we're
going to make decisions about what
infrastructure we build that's robust
and thinking of a musician is probably
the easiest way to explain this so if i
understand it right
a kid that starts practicing music when
they're really young the density of the
brain regions that deal with either how
their fingers move or reading sheet
music or you know whatever the different
elements are they are physically more
robust in a way that they will not be
with the same amount of hours if you
pick it up at the age 40. and so there
becomes like these really critical
because
i don't know if you've read the book
nudge but it talks about how little
pushes in any direction can have a huge
impact in somebody's life so my dad one
time made an off-handed comment that hey
because we had a camcorder nice to play
with it which now kids think yeah
everybody has a camera this was really
[__] rare back then so the fact that
my dad brought the camera home already
begins nudging me in a direction then my
dad makes a comment that he thinks that
i'm good with the camera that pushes me
even harder in that direction i end up
going to film school all this like and
so it becomes a question of my dad was
really um distant so to get his
attention was i i didn't have that sense
that i was doing it for that reason but
were those like little nudges that
pushed me to build all this
infrastructure now around visual
storytelling storytelling my whole life
revolves around this [__] so i'm like
knowing how nudges can have this big
impact
like for the parents out there listening
is there certain types of infrastructure
problem solving is what i heard you just
saying now or
critical thinking i don't know what
words you would use to describe what
you're talking about now so actually
there's so many points that i want to
address and the things you've said
already um
and actually if you don't mind just
before i forget the queue of things let
me go back to if to a few steps here in
case this is useful let's tie it all
together one is about about elon musk
versus you um
you know everybody's brain is running
the same software which is you absorb
the world and you um
you know you you generate remixes of it
and his brain is no different and when
you look at quotations from henry ford
from thomas edison whatever they're all
saying the same thing which is i mean
henry ford said i invented nothing new i
merely took the advances of all the
people before me and i just assembled it
into a new package and that's of course
what musk is doing because they're
actually weirdly there is no such thing
as a
as a thought out of the blue
everything builds on what you have been
exposed to
um
the second thing is the quotation you
mentioned was was martin heidegger yeah
every man is born as many men and dies
as one the reason where this all comes
together for parents why it's important
is because
um
the number of things that is going to
influence a child whether you bring home
a camera or whatever the thing is
it's so infinitely manifold that as a
parent you actually in the end
can't control there's just too much
stuff so the best a parent can do and
what the parents should do is just try
to
just try to bring home all that stuff
and play with your children and
encourage your children to do this stuff
because you can't possibly steer things
in a meaningful way when your father
brought home the camera that was a
meaningful important moment
but he might have brought home four
other things that you have forgotten
since because it just didn't resonate
with who you were as a person so the
weird part is we are this weird
combination of nature and nurture which
is to say you dropped into the world
with a particular set of genetics that
gave you particular predispositions for
some reason you're a real visual guy you
like doing that and so the camera
resonated with you but the other things
your dad brought home you don't even
remember them
so
this is the weird thing about who we
become is
is this mixture of nature and nurture if
you had to give a split
what would you say what i i've seen sort
of 50 50 do you think that's accurate
it's a dead question in in biology
nowadays because you can't say which is
because of the way they intertwine what
i mean by that is
um you know there's this moment where
you're dropping the world you've got a
certain set of genes but from there
there's feedback on your genetic
expression from your experiences and
this is this new field of epigenetics
which is to say
depending on the experiences you have
that actually feeds back into your brain
all the way down eventually to the level
of the nucleus in the neurons and you
change the conformation of the dna with
certain proteins that fit on it and
change it such that some genes are
getting expressed more some genes are
getting expressed less so
what this means is that the nurture
actually affects the nature
and and obviously the nature affects the
nurture because if you know if
let's say i like swimming right but i
don't have the wingspan of michael
phelps so i'm never gonna be
michael phelps and be able to compete
with him
um
so these things anyway all feedback
on each other
so that's why you can't even put a split
on it
yeah that is the notion that we're not
blank slates i think is really important
for people to understand we're going
through a super weird time right now i
am utterly shocked by this where people
are talking about humans like they're
sort of infinitely malleable
um and while that would actually be kind
of cool i wish and you've already
debunked this i wouldn't be myself if i
were infinitely malleable and so okay i
do accept that um but thinking of
children at least is sort of infinitely
malleable and that you know you could
become anything um is is really exciting
but it's so divorced from reality that
it breaks people's ability to predict
how human beings are going to react and
um how to even you know structure a
society in a way that's functional um
how do you think about that intertwining
are there things that you know
for for instance the sexes like are
there things that are somewhat sort of
categorizable if you know
just even that amount or the person or
is it like nope even even that you can't
begin to segregate people the the
interesting part is that
essentially anything you measure exists
on a distribution so let's take
something like you know skill it
or swimming or
math or whatever um you know
anything you think of there's this big
distribution in society and when it
comes to something like comparing the
sexes there's a distribution with
whatever you're measuring and these
those tend to be non um those tend to be
not centered exactly the same place and
yet overlapping a lot and that's why
it's challenging ever to say
oh well that's a male that's female so
they're going to be bump up because
you're only talk all you can the best
you can talk about is on average
um
so we're in this weird funny position
there where
you know
yeah one can try to ignore and say well
i think it makes no difference that
she's a female he's male but it makes
some difference on on average but maybe
not for that individual is the is the
key and as far as this thing but you
know what you just mentioned a moment
ago is the thing i've been thinking
about with all the
where we are in 2020
um
i can just tell you personally i give my
charity money to um
to organizations that deal with
kids in babies infants that's where i
put all my money on this on this bet
because just as one example
um there's one uh charity that i donate
to that deals with daycare centers
because
in poor neighborhoods where both parents
have to work or maybe it's just a single
mom um
they need to put the kid in daycare and
most of the daycare centers in poor
neighborhoods
just all the kids get gathered in front
of a television and they watch
television all day essentially the whole
goal is just to keep the kids alive for
the day but it's not interacting and
teaching with the children the way a uh
you know a good really rich
neighborhood's daycare center would
operate and this stuff matters so much
because a young child's brain is is so
thirsty for all the information of the
world and so that's why this matters a
lot and and
because of this issue we've been talking
about how brains flexibility diminishes
through time it's just where i put my my
bets my chips is that um you know
sometimes what you have in poor
neighborhoods is you have to make a
bet on the upcoming generation you say
i'm gonna do everything i can to make
this next generation get off the
starting blocks at an equal point as a
rich neighborhood so that um so that the
kids are not disadvantaged from day one
there's a guy named jeffrey canada that
i i have been stalking i'm waiting for
the restraining order i am trying to get
him on the show so desperately and he
said something and it's one of those i
don't know if i remember it accurately
and i can't refined it
but my memory of it is that he said so
he is a really really bright guy grew up
in harlem ends up getting a full ride to
harvard goes to harvard says i'm going
to come back and change education system
basically help all these kids in harlem
and
goes tries realizes the education system
is so problematic that he can't fix it
from the inside he has fixed from the
outside starts looking at what the real
problem is and what the real solution is
and realizes the big difference between
kids who grow up in
a sort of normal suburban life and kids
that grow up in poverty is the number of
words they hear by the time they're five
and the ratio that's positive to
negative
and
and the thought of being able to boil it
down to something that simple because
again going back to this notion of
infrastructure they have the language
infrastructure in their brain and that
that has these massive knock-on effects
later in terms of their ability to
communicate get a good job
all this crazy [__] and so like you he's
focused on kids and what i think i
remember him saying was you have to give
up on adults
and that may have just been the terror
that it struck into my heart but my
memory of that statement
which obviously is all about brain
plasticity has been so influential in my
life that this company impact theory
started aimed at adults and now about
five percent of what we do maybe twenty
percent twenty percent of what we do is
aimed at adults eighty percent is aimed
at kids because i'm like if i actually
want to have the kind of impact i want
to have i've got to hit him during that
age of imprint where their brain remains
incredibly malleable
and so yeah man that like talk to me
talk to me about um
what happened in i think it was the
ukraine
when there was so much death after the
war that
basically there was the orphans had
trouble yeah you know what that was
actually in romania it was after the
death of chuchesku there were tens of
thousands of kids who had been orphaned
because their parents had been killed so
the romanians set up these orphanages
these statement orphanages where um
[Music]
there were too many kids and too few
staff and so the staff said look
don't pick up the kid don't talk to the
kid because the kid will get clingy if
you do that so what they did is they
just ran their business keeping the kids
alive but not giving them what a child
needs and these kids grew up with
massive cognitive deficits this is one
of nature's tragic natural experiments
where you get to look at it and say ah
okay now we realize that what children
they're
here's the whole thing and this is as
you know the theme of livewire is that
human brains drop into the world
half-baked this is the great trick that
mother nature discovered with our
species you drop them in not ready but
there's a certain expectation a certain
gamble nature is taking which is that
you'll get the right sorts of inputs
and it's a gamble because if you don't
get those inputs then the brain does not
come out
optimally at all
talk to me about the inputs that will
break you if you don't get
well one of them is um
you know actually that's an interesting
question because we don't know how to
phrase it
except there's a general thing about
love and language and you know uh
attention and physical language break
you though because like if somebody's
deaf they can still develop and and have
normal relations when they're older i
think they are exactly right but they
are speaking language they have language
they have sign language that they're
speaking with people and so if they
didn't have that would they be um
developmentally [__]
they
probably that's an interesting question
let me think if i can think of an
example
i i don't i don't know i'll have to i'll
have to look that up the reason is
because all of the examples of deafness
i know and i know at this point hundreds
of thousands of deaf people they they've
all grown up in a society that's modern
enough that from whatever the age of six
months or a year or whatever their
parents said wow we need to
get help here and learn sign language or
put you into a school or get a tutor who
can teach you sign language so i
actually don't know of people who have
grown up where they are completely
ignored in that way and not getting any
language
of course there you know there's a
certain language of people paying
attention to you and touching you and
saying like
would you like to milk where even if you
can't hear you might still be getting a
sense of languageness
but there are these again these tragic
natural
natural experiments where a child is so
abused so neglected that let's say a
perfectly hearing child
doesn't get any language because the
parent locks them in a room
and just gives them food or something
but gives them none of the language or
attention and kids like that grow up
with really horrid deficits like they
never learn language they never learn
the structure of language grammatically
for example i tell the story one girl in
the book
who was found at the age of seven having
been abused like this
and
what happened after her parents were
arrested and so on all these
psychologists came in all these people
who gave her lots of love and attention
and tried to teach her but she never
could learn language it was too late
that window had closed for her she just
never got the rules of grammar so she
says she can say no and stop it and one
other thing but she can't
speak language there's nothing wrong
with her
in terms of genetically in terms of why
she couldn't do that yeah one of the
most interesting studies
[Music]
i've ever come across and i know you've
talked about this is harlow's monkeys
and how if you give the monkey the
option between basically sort of
affection physical affection comfort
from just a carpet mother
and then a wire mother but it actually
has food that it will go eat really fast
and then run back and cuddle the carpet
mother
it is so weird to me like when i hear
people say man humans are just love like
it makes my skin crawl but then when i
think about what the fact that if you
don't touch and love on a human it
actually dies
that is so
weird do you have a sense like is that
tied to the
the like think of the visual cortex
right visual cortex is expecting
information i'm sure you can explain
your theory on dreaming which i think is
[__] fascinating
like is there something where we have
like a love center that like if it isn't
getting that love it what the hell
happens like i don't understand how we
break fundamentally as a human
yeah
you know i would say it's this issue
so we don't know and
happily the reason we don't know is
because there's simply are not enough
examples of this so harlow's monkeys you
know he did this i guess about 50 years
ago
um where he would do things like you
know give the monkey that choice he also
did these experiments where he would
isolate a monkey and have the monkey
raised in isolation with a
one-way mirror that he could look
through
but those kinds of experiments were shut
down because you know he was doing it
let's say for the right reasons you know
trying to understand depression and so
on but it was just decided that the
outcomes were so awful that it was too
cruel to do and and these um
terribly abused children are super rare
thankfully so we don't really know
there's not a love center in the brain
but instead it's something about
about this issue of the brain coming
into the world where as much as possible
mother nature has put out onto the world
like you need to be getting this
love and attention and touch i mean we
understand a lot about the touch system
and if you're not getting touched and
stroked as a child that affects the
development of you know what's called
your somatosensory cortex you know this
part right under where you wear
headphones and
um do you have a hypothesis why
yeah
again it's this thing about it's this
thing about coming in
half programmed and the rest of it is
waiting for the world to program you and
if the world is not programming you
there are no hands on the keyboards
there
you're just not getting what you need
see what you have is uh you know
essentially an infant's brain without
without the extra stuff that you need to
to grow up
we as far as specifically like ah if you
don't get enough touch language this is
precisely what happens we don't know
that and as i said it's for the for the
right reasons that we don't know that
and
hopefully i kind of hope that we we
never know exactly why that is because
it would require studying that
yeah i mean look i hope that we figure
out why it is i hope we never find out
because
we have had cases like that for sure but
one thing that
is interesting and things begin to
unlock so the one of the key things that
i took away from livewire is this notion
that um the the brain is real estate you
use this great example of a map and if
you look at a map as a kid you just
assume oh all the country lines are like
that's how it is and of course it
couldn't be any other way
but as a historian you know looking back
on it it could have been
any manner of configurations and the
brain is the same that you have
competing resources fighting for
resources walk us through that because
to me i want to push some more on this
idea of how we break as a human if we
don't get the right input but i need to
understand
if it's tied to that sort of
resource thirst or or some other
mechanism
yeah so the general framework i put
forward is that it's actually a
competitive system under the hood there
so you look at a picture in a
neuroscience textbook and it says okay
here's the brain that's the visual parts
hearing touch and so on and that's how
every textbook is you think okay i got
it that's that's the brain but in fact
it's this fluid dynamic system that's
constantly changing
if you
are born blind this part isn't your
visual cortex that gets taken over by
hearing and touching something even if
you go blind later that gets taken over
um it's like that with everything for
people who are deaf that doesn't remain
their auditory cortex there's no
real estate that lies fallow in the
brain ever
and so this is the remarkable
thing about yeah about resource
allocation so that yeah you know the
analogy i give in the book is
it's like uh if you saw the
you know the cuban missile crisis you
were an alien that flew in you saw the
cuban missile crisis you'd say no the
americans and soviets nobody's doing
anything i guess everyone's just
nothing's happening but in fact what you
wouldn't realize is that all the
missiles are aimed everything is super
tight and the reason nothing is
happening is because all the guns are
pointed at each other and that's what i
propose is going on in the brain it has
to be understood as a competitive system
at many different levels of competition
from you know from regions all the way
down to neurons and even within neurons
synapses competing against one another
and so on
and so that's what allows things to
change
really rapidly in the brain
and what is the dynamic by which they
are either winning or losing is it i'm
receiving
input hahaha so i get to keep going
that's exactly it it's i'm getting input
and so
the um
i mean forgive me because you already
read the book but you know i give this
analogy of uh
of colonization in early the americas
you know you had the french and the
british and spanish were all colonizing
north america
and
what i did is i just went back and i
looked at it to see if i could correlate
how people's territory changed given the
number of ships they were sending over
from europe and what happened is the
french started sending fewer ships than
the british and um and so you know as
they sent fewer and fewer ships their
territory shrunk the french owned this
huge character all the way from canada
down to louisiana um
and as they sent less and less stuff
eventually they lost all their territory
and eventually they sold the whole
louisiana territory so
this is an analogy that i use to what's
going on about how the brain remaps
itself all the time it depends on the
number of ships coming over so you know
just as an example if you're an amputee
and you lose your arm um
suddenly there's no more ships coming in
from your hand to the brain and so that
territory gets taken over so yes it's
about how much data is coming in and by
the way how useful that data is so if
you look at a map of the body
in the brain you find that
the areas that carry more
sensitive information have bigger
representations so for example in my
somatosensory cortex my fingertips have
a big representation because they're
carrying a lot of important information
in contrast my thigh doesn't you know it
has very little territory who cares
about my thigh
in terms of the number of ships that
it's sending up to the brain
so if they're locked in this battle for
that going back to the idea of if you're
not touching an infant loving an infant
stroking them
is is it that
regions that would otherwise go to that
are being taken over by something
and that causes that sort of like
basically that there is it's probably
more distributed than this but the idea
being there is a distribution of items
in your brain that their allocation is
for social interaction so that i get
social cues in and i i sort of play with
them as you talk about babbling so i
sort of babble i give a response and
maybe i i hit my parents you see kids do
that all the [__] time i grab your
hair and you tell me no oh [__] okay i
get a bit of input there i smack your
face and you tell me not to do that whoa
and so i begin to realize okay cool like
there's this give and take relationship
that i have with this person it's not
carte blanche i can't do whatever i want
and now
i'm basically forming
the literal centers of my brain
as myself as a social creature
and is and when now we take that sort of
feral child and put them now in a social
context they seem broken but they might
actually do just fine as a completely
isolated creature
that's right although it would be hard
to define what we mean by doing just
fine it's an isolated feature but but
but i totally i totally agree with your
point of view on this which is it this
is the part i talk about in the book
about babbling so we all know with
children they babble and the reason
they're babbling is because they're
saying some with their mouth and they're
hearing what comes out of their mouth
and they're comparing that to what's
coming out of their mother's mouth their
father's mouth and their
figuring out what and as they get older
it's a different kind of babbling
exactly it's like a social babbling
they're like what if i say fu to this oh
wow that didn't work at all and so
um this is how you try things out in the
world and this is how our brains learn
how to drive our bodies by the way is by
motor babbling you know we try things
out oh i turned the bike this way oops
that didn't work and so on so um
yeah i think that's exactly right
they're not getting
a chance to do motor babbling and one of
the things about plasticity that really
matters is that you have these windows
and they're pretty short windows before
those doors close different areas of the
brain have different windows to them but
um yeah so if you don't have a chance to
try language and figure out what's going
on whatever at some point it becomes too
late to do what are some of the doors
that close early yeah well so language
is one of them even subtle things like
uh
like accents i mean i just i've always
thought this is a cool
interesting thing that you know i can
tell usually when i'm talking to
somebody if they were born in a foreign
country
when they moved to america because if
you move here before the age of 13 you
don't have any accent but if you moved
here after the age of 13 you always
retain a bit of an accident and the
later you move the more of an accident
you retain so so i compare in the book
you know mila kunis to arnold
schwarzenegger both of whom were born
outside of the united states didn't
speak any english mila kunis moved here
when she was six so most people don't
know that she was born in the ukraine
and learned english later but
schwarzenegger moved here when he was 19
and
he can't shake that accent it's a thick
accent and it's because they both
learned the the structure of language
and grammar and how to get what they
want but even more subtle things change
different times so
this is all to say that it's actually a
whole suite of doors that close for
different aspects of different times
um yeah but you know people look at
things like
you know um
right learning language in general um
you know skillet piano or violin or
something i use the example of
vladimir ashkenazi and yitzhak pearlman
as great pianist and violinist and so on
um
i made the assertion in the book that um
they would never be able to be
what they are if they picked up their
instruments as a teenager and i just saw
that someone made a comment online where
they said oh dr eagleman's wrong he's
what a jerk because
people can pick up musical instruments
as teenagers and become just as good as
them but they can't it's just not it's
just not accurate you cannot become a
perlman and ashkenazi unless you start
really really young and it's because you
have to burn that stuff all the way down
into the deep parts of your brain uh so
let's be maybe say it a different way
and see if i'm right it is both that
they need to burn it into a deeper part
of the brain it'll be interesting to
hear you walk through sort of how things
start in the hippocampus and then um get
pushed deeper and deeper and that the
the notion of sort of depth is real and
um but then the the other side of this
is
not just the putting it deeper and
deeper it's that the very ability to put
deeper and deeper is no longer and that
that's sort of the fundamental thing
that your book um
i hate about the truth of your book
which is that they there are these doors
and that they do close and so even if
like let's say um that pearlman were to
play for
you know 30 years but he plays from the
time that he's two till he's 32 and now
i pick up the violin at 20 and i play
until i'm 60. now i've clocked more
years
but because i'm sort of outside of that
window
it doesn't matter right so even that
sort of deeper and deeper it's not just
hours clocked
it's the time in which i clock them
exactly it's when you started there's
one other thing as you know i point out
in the book which is it's about
relevance also so
for itself pearlman i don't know about
his childhood but you know presumably he
got proper social feedback where people
said wow you're really good at that hey
you know this is something that you've
got a special talent that kind of stuff
really matters a lot because if you had
let's say picked it up at the age of two
just like yitzhak did
but for some reason you had mean parents
who said oh tom it's really hurting my
ears i don't want you
then you could have clocked the same
number of hours but it wouldn't have the
same influence why because we've got all
these neurotransmitter systems that are
involved in reward
and that of course includes social
reward what you're getting out of it and
um will that increase the
rate or
veracity with which i learn something
yes
it increases the
ability to even have the rock the right
cocktail of neurotransmitters present
for the plasticity to take place
so you actually need i mean let's let's
say i said to you hey tom i really want
to teach you seven important dates
in uh mongolian history and i told you
like if you don't care about mongolian
history it's just so hard for you to
remember it it's right but if i'm
telling you something that really
matters to you and your life and it's
relevant bang you'll remember that
you'll have a so it has to do with
relevance to you and part of it i mean
this is an interesting complicated area
but part of relevance to you has to do
with also what you think you can get out
of it like if i tell you some
interesting fact and you think wow
that's cool i can tell it's someone
else's cocktail party and they'll be
really impressed by that fact whatever i
mean people are always trying to
surprise and impress each other and
there's all kinds of interesting reasons
why you might find something relevant
but that needs to be there for
plasticity to take place
which is more powerful positive or
negative reinforcement oh it's an
interesting question
i don't know i mean both are used for so
many things and you know even when
raising a child you have to use both
i you know it's interesting question
because people often ask this or you
know propose this thing of like hey i'm
going to raise my child i'm only going
to say sweet things to my child and
never say no and but and i don't really
think that works i don't think you can
do that so the child slaps you in the
face and you say
you know you did a great job slapping
and
yeah it's hard to it's hard to get
someone to so i think both are needed to
fence behavior inappropriately has
anything been studied on that like
because i for instance um i was a very
rambunctious child like i was i
certainly had um i was diagnosed with
hyperactivity disorder
maybe some adhd thrown in for good
measure but because i could sleep
through the night my mom refused to
medicate me and i'm very glad for that
but my mom was also a hardcore
[__] she did not play and she
was able to keep me in line and there
were many times where i really pushed
the boundaries man and because my mom
kept me in line i i think that's part of
the reason i developed discipline like
there were just things you could do in
my house you could not do and there was
work that was expected of you and that
was just that and she wasn't going gonna
back down did not matter how much i
fought pushed she just wasn't gonna
break
and i'm curious if
if anybody's looked because it just like
for me i said look if i had kids a
hundred percent i would not beat my
children but i'd give them a spanking if
that's what they need because my mom did
it and it works so well for me if they
don't need it i won't do it but and i
people freak out so it's a good thing
that i'm not having kids so anybody
nobody has to worry about that but like
has anybody looked at that
yeah i mean look this is one of those
things
everybody seems to have an opinion about
that but it's very difficult to compare
if you take a child who's raising family
there's no spanking and a child is
spanking it's just really hard to do any
kind of good controlled experiment on
that because there are probably a
hundred other differences in the family
as well so by the way when i had
children i thought okay i'll spank them
appropriate you know just when the
situation really calls her my wife said
no way you are not ever injecting that
kind of fear into a child about they're
going to get physically hit and so on so
we've just never done it and that's cool
i'm happy to go along with that but
i will never know the answer of whether
they would have
been better off with a little bit of
physicals you know
hitting or not um yeah those are there
there's a whole
class of
questions that we can ask
where there's no good way to study it i
mentioned this in the book because i
i haven't heard anybody else saying this
but i think it's really important one of
the questions that people ask is what is
the effect of children growing up with
the internet now this is a question that
always comes up to me when i give talks
and everybody's got an opinion on this
but it is a very difficult question to
answer why because there's no way to do
a good control group on that you can't
say okay i'm going to take these 18 year
olds who've grown up wired and i'm going
to compare them to these other 18 year
olds who did not have the internet
because the only 18 year olds who don't
have the internet are either amish kids
or kids who are totally impoverished in
rural china or the favelas of south
america or whatever
um but there are a hundred other
differences there and you can't compare
them to the previous generation because
there are a hundred other differences
with the previous generation
um and so it's very difficult to say oh
i know for sure the effect of the
internet is blah blah blah blah because
it's just hard to do that scientifically
so anyway there's a whole there's a
whole class of experiments like that i
think probably spanking is one of them
yeah it makes me very sad that you can't
run both like timelines to see what
ended up working i'm really curious and
you know with sort of scientific
curiosity i'm open like if if i actually
would have been better off somehow if my
mom had had a more ninja style of
parenting that didn't involve spanking
me cool i'm i don't have some need for
it to be that spanking worked i just
want to know what actually works like
when i think about there's sort of two
things that i think about one i actually
am very very interested in what sort of
the ideal thing is to give to a kid
psychologically to help them thrive just
when i think about what's the
contribution i want to make to society
it's all around mindset and kids um
and then also just as as an adult i
think about how far can we take this you
know what i mean like every time i
engage with you and your work it's
it there is some like cocktail party
like this is just [__] fascinating
and i want to tell people this at a
party but there's far more than that for
me is i want to use it in my own life
you know the quote that i began with i'm
i'm not kidding when i say i'm
legitimately haunted by the notion that
genius is a young man's game and the
reason is i was a late bloomer and so
the idea that i know physicists talk
about sort of 35 36 is about the the
sort of last moment you can expect
yourself to have any meaningful
breakthrough
and
i'm in my 40s so that sucks
you know i actually want to address this
issue about breakthrough because i
originally had written a piece of this
in the book and i took it out in the end
but i think this is actually really
important so
um
one of the models that i prefer let me
back up for one second just to give the
foundation to this one of the models i
propose is that the right way to think
about the brain is in terms of pace
layers by which i mean some things are
changing really fast and and if those
stay stable then that changes the layer
below them which is a little bit more
conservative and it's changing and if
that's doing something in the layer
below that says
okay i see that that's a really
consistent message all chain and so what
happens is all the way down you get
these deeper and deeper things the name
pace layer i'm taking from something
that the thinker stuart brand proposed
who said that when you look at a city
you need to think of it in terms of pace
layer so fashion changes rapidly
the infrastructure of the city like
where the buildings are that changes
more slowly
the businesses that are in the buildings
that changes more rapidly than the
infrastructure the governance of the
city that changes more slowly all the
way down to the nature you know like
where the river is in the city that
changes the most soil and the way to
understand the city is understand the
interaction of all these different
layers of speed
and so i thought that was such a great
insight that i really wanted to look at
the brain that way
and that allowed me to put a lot of data
together anyway
this is why just as an example
there's this property of neurology
that's very weird which is that you
that older memories are more stable than
younger memories and if you've seen
people at the end of their lives they
often
will have essentially receded back into
their childhood they've forgotten all
the stuff in the last few years last few
decades but they remember everything
about their childhood and their
childhood language and all stuff and
what happens a lot actually is that
people revert to the language they spoke
as a child even if they've been speaking
let's say english their whole adult life
um
so
there's so that's one of the big themes
of the book about how plasticity
actually works but what interested me is
this notion of
of breakthroughs this is the part that i
didn't put in the book unfortunately but
this notion that sometimes as you know
in your 40s
you'll have a breakthrough where
suddenly something you've believed your
whole life
something happens where you get a
different view on and you say wait a
minute maybe this deep layer this thing
where i absolutely thought this was
fundamentally how the world works maybe
that's not true
and all this other stuff falls apart in
your internal model and you're able to
recast something and um
have you ever taken the landmark forum
you ever done that i know of it very
well but no
okay great so anyway they talk about
breakthroughs that's um
something that they try to get people to
have and it's a really stunning
experience what you know we've all had
in our lives various breakthroughs and
say let's say you thought somebody did
something to you or said something or
whatever and then you find out years
later that's not actually what happened
and there was a misinterpretation of
what
this is the kind of thing that really um
is is meaningful for changing our lives
and the reason i mention this is in the
context of you saying in your 40s can
you still change happily there are these
deep things that happen where sometimes
you have an opportunity to change and
the and okay so that's one thing and the
related issue that i want to say is this
is what's happening to us now
during covid palooza we are all
knocked off of our hamster wheels we are
suddenly our internal models remember i
talked about how our you know our whole
lives we sort of make this model of
exactly what's going on all of a sudden
we're all kicked off this this path of
least resistance
and we're having to re-figure out
everything afresh
and there's a lot of stress and
depression and anxiety it's a terrible
time for essentially everybody but the
one tiny silver lining that is worth
emphasizing is that it forces our brains
to rethink our models everything about
you know where i don't know where you're
gonna get these supplies how are you
gonna get food in your fridge where you
get the toilet paper all the stuff to
more creative things about okay well
geez how do i how do i thrive from here
given that my shop has closed or my you
know employment has ended or where
you're like what do i do now and it's
it's forcing a creativity it's forcing
the brain to rethink things in a way
that is actually despite all the lousy
stuff really good for the brain to to
build new bridges
i can hear people in the comments
screaming about um not being heard not
being understood you don't know what
they're going through what do you say to
that
what i say is
i actually do hear you i hear all the
crappy stuff about what's going on and
let's all agree on that and put that
over here and i'm saying that's this
extra bit that is i mean everything has
a silver lining and that's the that's
the one to this just as an example i
mean from the first moments of lockdown
i started seeing this stuff where people
were i don't know using their banks of
3d printers to print hospital masks or
playing
bingo across the apartment complex in
these apartments where everyone's you
know in their own apartment but shouting
what's going on across the other thing
and everyone's having fun in this
community thing or there's a friend of
mine who plays uh tennis and suddenly
everything got all the tennis courts got
shut down and so she started calling
people
on airbnb wealthy people who have a
tennis court on their property and say
hey can i just airbnb or tennis court
for an hour you know stuff like but it's
just like it's really creative it's so
smart to do that and so there's new
models for everything going on and um
so despite all the lousy stuff which we
all agree on
uh it's it's it's the one thing that's
coming out of it is that that part of it
is good for your brain
because it's forcing you to rethink deep
parts of your internal model this is
another fascinating part of the brain
and i'm super excited to be putting out
these ideas with you here where you can
slap me down if i'm out of my mind um so
the i think a lot about the quote it
doesn't matter what you look at it
matters what you see
and i find that
getting people to focus on what's good
about this time is critically important
like the bat is going to present itself
you're going to be clubbed over the head
with the bad you're not going to be able
to avoid it but if you're looking for
the bad you're going to be overwhelmed
by it if you're looking for the good
it's going to shift your focus and now
you're going to start to okay cool well
i can actually make something out of
this
is that really the reticular activating
system like is that is your brain
designed to amplify what you already
believe
um it is absolutely the case that we see
what what your internal model is already
built to detect it's more than the
reticular activating system it's the
whole principle of how the system
operates and that's why you can gain
expertise in something so if i am
you know you talk pearlman i hear
somebody playing the
violin and i hear the notes a little
flat and they're doing but like i not
being attack probably would not would
not hear any of that stuff because i'm
not
um
i'm not even sensitive to those kinds of
details so yes we are always seeing what
we've already built up our expertise in
um
to see and i agree with you i mean part
of
you know i mentioned earlier where this
massively social species where a lot of
the wiring of our brain comes about from
other brains but this is what's so
useful is you have a way of seeing the
world i have a way of seeing world
everyone we know has this but when we
communicate we get to share that like
hey but tom what if you looked it this
way hey david what if you looked at it
this way and that's so unbelievably
useful for break that's really our only
chance unfortunately i think is other
people telling people we love and trust
telling you hey wait what if you looked
at it this other way matters massively
because in answer to the thing you said
which i think is totally right i'm
probably in isolation never going to be
smart enough to look at it a different
way than i'm used to looking at it you
know it's interesting going back to that
idea of um
breakthroughs and and and i i will
introduce the idea of sort of
reinventing yourself um
i'm curious to know if there are
specific things that you do as a
scientist to stay relevant if staying
relevant is even something you care
about or no no i want to niche out and
just go like hard hard down this one
path that i've chosen
as an entrepreneur i've it started out
accidental and has now become somewhat
intentional i have accidentally
reinvented myself sort of every eight to
twelve years and
dude the way that you're able to see
things other people can't see because
you have experience in a completely
different industry um like even now i'll
get my teammates pitching technological
solutions and i'm like i used to run a
technology company so i know and
understand things about the pain of
creating technological solutions that
you're very much discounting or just
straight blind to or coming into the
comic book industry now having worked in
nutrition and doing distribution to
retail outlets at a global scale you see
sort of how ridiculously broken the
comic book distribution industry is um
do you do things like that to try to
like stay fresh
yeah i mean this is one of the joys of
of science is that you can get involved
in very different areas of things so as
you know you know i i do things from
neuro law
all the way to things like sensory
substitution how to feed new data
streams into the brain and create new
senses these are very different i study
issues about synesthesia i study things
about time perception and each of these
i hope brings things to one another and
then as you know i spun off a company
from my lab five years ago
um and
you know
the good news also on a personal level
by the way is that
i didn't know anything about running a
company and so my my learning curve was
so steep all the vocabulary all the way
i had to run a board meeting all this
stuff and that's such a pleasure to
always be on the steepest part of the
learning curve because
if one is not reinventing oneself in
these ways
then you become really good at being you
know whatever an insurance salesman or a
pool repair guy or whatever things and
and you never get that kind of challenge
um
yeah so i could not agree with you more
that there's always things that can be
ported over from various things yeah i
think looking people looking for ways to
do that like going way out of their way
to do that and that goes back to what
you're saying about the nuns and like
staying fresh and pushing yourself and
having constant challenges and staying
social was one of the things that i took
away from the nun thing um let's talk
about neo-sensory your your company this
[__] is so interesting to me
the second the buzz can read like
infrared
about it
um
what is what what are new senses how do
we actually pull that [__] off great we
can already read infrared so so so is it
on the market though that is it's on the
market it's on the market i could buy it
today yeah yeah yeah
i knew i could do the sound i didn't
know that infrared exactly what you do
is you so i should i should clarify um
what we have is
the buzz which is the wristband with
vibratory motors on it and then we have
a series of blog posts on if you want to
do infrared you buy these parts you
solder this you do it this here's the
api and it's done so all the
instructions are there to do the
infrared thing but you just said i have
to solder something myself
yes it'll be good for your brain to do
tom that's true good you got me you got
me
um
yeah so so the company is uh you know
this thing i spun off from my lab
because i got really interested in this
idea about
how the brain takes information given
that it's totally dark and silent inside
the brain all you have is these spikes
so the question is can you feed
information into the brain via unusual
pathways so so we made this this
wristband was with
vibratory motors on it
and we can capture any kind of
information and feed it onto the skin
which climbs up the arm and a spinal
cord into the brain and the brain can
figure out how to make the right sorts
of correlations
to come to have a direct perceptual
experience of it so yeah as you said the
main thing we're doing is for people
with hearing loss we capture sound and
turn that into patterns operation and
they come to hear the auditory world and
not only can they come to hear it but
they have a
direct perceptual experience of it the
way that you would think of hearing
through your ears
which of course seems totally natural to
you but of course you had to learn how
to use your ears it's just spikes that
are getting sent to the brain from that
very complicated machinery
um we can transfer that to this other
part of the body and then the brain can
figure out how to hear with that could a
person wearing that understand their own
name
oh yeah
so i could say
tom or david and they can actually tell
the difference
oh yeah
yeah well because your name is something
you over train on what's more difficult
with the wristband is to understand
let's say an audio book with lots of
detail but your name is an easy one the
reason it's hard to do the audio book is
because you've only got the skin of the
wrist with the wristband originally we
built a vest that was covered in
vibratory motors and with that actually
you could learn you could do lots of
good stuff
uh you know really really understand the
details of language further but it turns
out that's totally impractical
in terms of product market fit but
everyone's willing to do the the
wristbands so slightly lower resolution
but but what people get out of it is the
total environmental awareness as in oh
there's a dog barking my baby's crying
somebody's calling my name there's a
knock on the door there's a doorbell you
know all the stuff around you that we
take for granted in the world
really helps if you can pick up on that
but what we've been doing is um
just recently now that we've been on the
market for about six months is
having our customers take questionnaires
about their private internal subjective
experience in other words is it is
actually like hearing or is it you know
when a dog barks do you feel like oh
there's a buzzing on my wrist that must
be a dog where's the dog or is it
instead like oh there's dog barking
somewhere and and and it's the latter
after some number of months it just
becomes the ladder like oh yeah i hear a
dog marking somewhere even though it's
coming into your brain through a
different pathway
dude that is so crazy
and so exciting and i've heard you
contrast this with neurolink which is my
other sort of fetish
i'm super excited but i think you're
right in terms of invasiveness i would
not be an early adopter of something
that requires them to cut open my skull
um but
this the idea of the vibratory stuff
becoming a sense
i there's i don't know an immediate sort
of
recognition of what that would be like
partly from video games in that you in
the controllers i don't think so much
about the controller vibrating in my
hand as much as i think i'm being shot
because i always play first person
shooter games
and so it's like okay [__] i'm being
shot where am i being shot from because
you're you're picking up all these cues
from the the controller um so i
definitely get that what are the what
are the senses that you guys are working
on so we have sound we have infrared
what else
yeah we've got about i got about 20
experiments going um
so one thing i presented a ted a while
ago is this thing with drones where you
can feel the pitch y'all roll
orientation and heading of the drone on
your skin so you're becoming one with
the drone it's like you're stretching
your skin up to there so you can learn
how to fly in the fog or the dark
because it's an extension of you um
we've done things with you know just
getting twitter data or stock market
data where you feel like oh yeah oh
oil's crashing or whatever the stocks
you're following that kind of thing
we're doing things with uh for example
continuous glucose monitoring for people
with diabetes um you know currently
they've got a glucose patch and then
they have to look at their cell phone to
understand what they're thinking is but
if you can feel what's going on with
your blood sugar everything that makes
you much more responsive to it
um we're doing things with some a team
recently did this thing with air
pollutants um so you can feel the via
the um you know the the what do you call
it the the the
the particulate matter in the air um
was it pm 1.5 or something i forgot i
have no idea you can make it up and i'd
never know uh
how are you guys taking in the data
so what we're doing is we so we built
the buzz which as i said has a
microphone for people with hearing loss
but we also have an open api and we have
sdks for all these platforms so you can
feed in any data stream you want via
bluetooth for example
and so
we
are just finishing a developer contest
where 70 teams applied from all around
the world and people are feeding in
different data streams to it because we
set it up so it's super easy to do
did you offer a cash prize
yeah we have a cash prize exactly
and um yeah
and by the way it's not that much it's a
thousand bucks which isn't really that
much but
the
level of enthusiasm we got about people
who are already waiting and willing to
do this
is so extraordinary so um do you know in
in some of the more extreme cases or
even in like the infrared one
what are you using is that are you using
a cell phone if you guys develop
something like what is the the mechanism
by which you detect the infrared
so what you have is a little um infrared
detector which you can buy for about
three bucks we put it on you know for
example the simplest ways we just put it
on a breadboard we put some wires and so
on and we put that right next to the
buzz
um
and that just talks to it either
directly or via bluetooth so
you know as you're walking around the
world you're just sensing if there's
infrared for example the first day we
ever built this which was already a year
and a half ago but i was walking um
between two buildings in the dark and
suddenly i felt a bunch of infrared
and so i
thought what is that so i started
following my wrist and it took me to a
building with an infrared camera with
infrared leds so it's a night vision
camera totally invisible to you under
normal circumstances it was completely
obvious to me that i was there that i
was getting radiated with infrared light
and um you know you can see i mean for
example temp you can set up different
wavelengths of of infrared because there
are many different lengths um but
you know if we have it measuring
temperature i can walk through a parking
lot and tell which cars have just
recently parked versus which cars have
been there for a while because the
engine block is hot if they've just
recently gotten there i went to the
library with it i could actually tell on
the display shelf which books had been
recently picked up because there's an
infrared out
yeah yeah i can tell which seat was
recently sat in there were two chairs
there this one has a hot signature this
one does not yeah it's weird how much
how much information is there in the
infrared range but it's completely
invisible to us it's not to all animals
lots of snakes seeing infrared range and
so on um but our eyes just aren't
engineered for that and so it's totally
invisible
and you know we may have talked about
this before tom but i am so interested
in the whole spectrum it's going to take
me
a lifetime to explore the spectrum but i
feel like the spectrum of potential
inputs
no sorry of electromagnetic radiation so
the part that we call visible light is
this very tiny little piece of it but
everything radio waves gamma rays
microwaves all this stuff is the same
stuff it's electromagnetic radiation
it's just that we can't see it it's
invisible to us
but it's easy to set up detectors to be
able to see this stuff and so i feel
like there are probably several nobel
prizes hidden in different parts of the
spectrum and i'm going to spend my
lifetime exploring different stuff but
now what's cool is we've got this
developer community that's building and
building that's exploring this one of
the things i can't remember if we ever
talked about this before but
just an example of the kind of things
that can be discovered is i have a
friend who runs a satellite company and
they view things in the microwave range
just a different wavelength of light and
uh and what they found quite
accidentally is that you can tell if
water is drinkable or polluted just
based on how it looks in the microwave
range yeah
super simple thing but no one ever knew
that before but all you have to do is
start looking and you start finding
stuff like that and so
this is the kind of thing i'm so excited
about and by the way some people ask me
a question i just want to address this
some people say
well if you're going to take all this
information why don't you just feed it
into an artificial neural network
because they're so smart and they can do
pattern recognition you want to do that
the reason is
that has no notion of what is meaningful
to a human so i am a human i'm walking
around seeing
the the small part of the spectrum that
is useful to humans and i'm now feeling
another part of the spectrum and it's
the correlations that i can discover
there
that
matter to us just as an example you know
like with the stock market someone says
well why don't you just have an
artificial neural network look for these
patterns the reason is i as a human can
walk down the street and i see wow you
know i just noticed everyone's wearing
these new shoes but also everyone's kind
of depressed about the scope thing and
also you know i know that this company
is laying off 10 000 of their employees
and yeah i have all this knowledge as a
human and by the way i'm detecting
something about the stock market it's
that combination that matters it's not
just looking for patterns it's looking
for patterns with what matters to humans
it's interesting
i read what you're saying
i guess maybe with just with different
words which is
it might be actually useful to put
everything through that um
the neural network and and have that
spit out the things that it's gonna spit
out but this to me is is more exciting
and more interesting in that i get to
determine
what matters to me i get to decide sort
of what bands you know i'm playing with
what parts of the spectrum
um
that is so interesting the
the one that really got me and i thought
this is [__] interesting is vision on
my back
like being able to like how much you can
actually begin to sense oh it's it's
somebody they're moving they're actually
moving towards me they're moving towards
me quite quickly um they're on my left
they're on my right they're big they're
small like that's crazy and
that gets so exciting and the thought
that this stuff is actually here now
so i wrote a comic book which i'm
actually wearing the shirt because i
figured this would come up about people
that augment themselves with technology
so it's set 30 years in the future
and it's because the the idea behind the
story is that the world will bifurcate
the two types of people which is
something i stole completely from i
think it's fahrenheit um 451 where he's
saying
if you say that you can't read anymore
the world will split and you've got the
people that get behind that notion then
you've got people who live out in the
wilderness because they're just not
prepared to give up on reading
and i thought that's really [__]
interesting and this idea of bifurcation
where you hit these moments where the
world just splits and i think technology
is going to be one of them certainly
when you get into neurolink you're going
to have people that are just there's a
sense of purity and they don't they
don't want you [__] with the human
body and it's divine and you know just
don't mess with it and then you can have
people like me that as soon as it's safe
like i'm going hard for that technology
um so augmenting myself such that i can
read um take one that you talked about
which is magnetic north
like even just being able to
read magnetic north like that's
cool
that is so cool and this was actually
i can't remember maybe 20 years or
something this has been going on and
when i say going on i mean it's a very
tiny little thing but there's this
company called feel space and they you
know they make this belt that just
vibrates in the direction of magnetic
north so as i turn i'm always feeling it
on my body and um and yeah that you know
people
there's actually two interesting things
that come out of that one is that
people
develop a new qualia in other words a
subjective sense it's not just oh i know
where north is but instead it's the way
that things fit together if i'm walking
around like oh yeah that part of the
building and that over there people just
have a better sense of that but the
other thing that struck me as
interesting and i mentioned this in the
book is that
the experimenters running the study
would ask the subjects who'd been
wearing the belt for a couple months you
know what's it like and blah blah and
there were a lot of things that the
subjects felt they just couldn't
communicate but the subjects could
communicate this to each other quite
well because it was a shared experience
and that's what language is all about is
shared experiences and so
when they you know this is like the uh
you know seeing a new color or whatever
when they were able to you know let's
say you and i got something where we
were able to see a new color we could
talk about each other but with nobody
else so what i suggested in the in
livewire is that we may actually be on
the cusp of not just a bifurcation but
uh you know
multiple pathways coming out
where depending on what you're using
these new senses for let's say i'm doing
stock market and you're doing twitter
and someone else is doing whatever you
know that uh that we have a very
different internal experience
and there's no way to communicate with
each other so i say to you wow tom you
know i
i just i think
google is going up and apple is going
down and that feels a very weird way to
me and i try to explain to you you have
no ability to understand even if you
pretended to understand you wouldn't
really get what i'm saying and if you
said okay look i don't know but i can
tell you what my infrared experience
like and i wasn't doing that i would not
really understand what you're meaning
just like just like if you try to
explain vision to a person who's born
blind
they there's no way they can never
understand you or try to explain
purpleness to a person who's born
colorblind there's no way for them to
actually get what you're talking about
yeah man it is uh it's intriguing now
one thing i'm really curious about is
in the book you talk about how dreaming
may be a defense against other
regions of the brain taking over that
while we sleep which is really
interesting and i'm curious as we begin
to augment what areas of the brain will
be given up because if nothing is
sitting unused now
if i take in the stock market and and
for anybody watching i highly encourage
you don't take in twitter don't don't
get the qualia of a twitter feed that
strikes me as a very bad idea yeah i
totally agree but what regions of the
brain are going to be
usurped
yeah well let me let me say two things
just for for listeners to our
conversation who don't know uh what the
dreaming hypothesis is it's just that um
you know what i realized was the speed
of takeover when
senses go so i mentioned earlier if
you're born blind your visual cortex
gets taken over but i think the probably
the most shocking thing that we've
discovered is
i mean as a field is the speed of this
takeover so it turns out if you
blindfold somebody and stick them in the
scanner you start seeing activity in
their visual cortex
pretty rapidly like within an hour you
can start detecting
hearing and touch
registering in the visual cortex which
means the whole system as i said earlier
sprung tight ready for takeovers and
moves and so
what my student don vaughn and i
realized is that you know when the
planet rotates into darkness every night
obviously we're talking about in
evolutionary time not recently um the
it's pitch black and you can still hear
and touch and taste in the dark but you
can't see in the dark and so that puts
the visual system at a disadvantage and
what we realized is given the speed of
takeover that means
the visual system is going to get taken
over at night time
and so the right way to combat that is
every 90 minutes you just blast activity
into the occipital lobe back here and
that's what defends it from takeover and
that we propose is the whole circuitry
and everything about dreaming is why we
have that every 90 minutes during the
night we're just blasting information
there and of course if you're a sighted
person you experience that as
vision even though your eyes are closed
you see
whatever bizarre thing you're you're
seeing
so um and it's obviously related to what
you've done during the day and your
whole
level of experience and so on um
and by the way as a side note if you're
a blind person you still have dreams
it's just that now your dreams involve
okay i'm walking around the house and
the furniture's moved and then i feel a
bear over here and just some bizarre
thing like that but that's because their
occipital cortex has been taken over by
touch and hearing and so on
um anyway that's the the dreaming
activation theory um
now what you asked is about if we build
new senses like you know stock market
infrared and so on what gets taken over
here's the thing the brain is really
good at sharing territory and one thing
that is unknown right now
is
how many senses we're going to be able
to add i mean we already know we can add
a sixth sense but can we add a seventh
and eighth and ninth the tenth we just
don't know it may be that um
what what eventually happens let's
imagine that you know i'm wearing two
buzzes and two on my legs and a belt and
whatever you know maybe by the time i've
added a bunch of senses my vision starts
to get a little bit worse or you know a
little bit excuse me a little bit
blurrier or something like that we don't
we don't actually know yet um but in
general the brain is really good
at sharing stuff you know i teach
medical students and they always say
things like oh gosh if i learn one more
fact something else is going to fall out
but happily the brain does not work that
way
instead everything is built on what you
already know and so
we might be able to add lots of senses
without any noticeable degradation
so if the brain doesn't work that way
that one more fact is gonna have to take
the place of something else
walk me through what is the process of
remembering so i'm very frustrated by my
memory
and
i find that i have to read in what i
call reading swarms so i'll encounter an
idea i don't worry about memorizing it
because i know i'm going to read on the
same subject a bunch of different things
so that it just sort of gets repeated
and that's sort of the only way for me
to solidify this stuff
what what is the mechanism of memory
transferring from short-term to
long-term specifically yeah you know
this is still a very active area in
neuroscience we don't actually know the
answers yet we know a ton of data on
this um
you mentioned this thing about
transferring short-term long-term i'll
just mention something about that which
is the theory has always been the entire
time i've been in neuroscience the
theory has always been what happens is
you take something in lives in
short-term memory and that's actually
kept by
um
active neurons so if i say i say hey tom
can you you know um go over there and
get me uh
if you wouldn't mind get me a glass of
water with three ice cubes and this and
the coke and whatever and you say okay
and you keep that in short for memory
it's active in your head but long-term
memory is something that gets
consolidated later into the structure of
what's going on with the neurons
and
what we know is that the hippocampus
this area of the brain is involved in
that consolidation if you remove the
hippocampus you can still have the
short-term memory just fine but then you
forget it you can't quite turn into
long-term memory
and there have been you know many
clinical cases where someone had both
their hippocampi removed and that's what
happens is they sort of live in this
window of 15 minutes and by the way
we've all experienced that you
experience that every morning because
you wake up and you have some dream
that's so vivid and you you know tell
your wife like oh my god this is what
happened but 50 but it's like impossible
to hold on to because the hippocampus
actually shut down during dreaming and
so that never gets consolidated in
something so you just can't hold on to
it after a little bit
um
so that is the sort of canonical idea of
how memory works and then what i suggest
is it's actually getting burned down
deeper and deeper but i will say even
this canonical theory has question marks
around it um
a team recently showed that
instead of
short term and then gets transferred to
the long term you might be getting both
at the same time but this takes longer
to develop and it's not related to
anyway it's not going it's almost going
into the details all i want to say is
it's 20 20 and we still don't understand
tons about how it works and i and i want
to see one other thing which is
people look at what's going on in the
field of artificial neural networks
machine learning ai and so on they think
wow that's amazing like really great
stuff going on it must be that we've got
this all figured out
that stuff is sort of a baby toy model
where the idea is you say okay we're
going to take
neurons and we're going to connect them
together in synapses or connections and
we're going to just change the strength
of those connections and you can do
really great stuff with that but that's
actually a bifurcation from neuroscience
and people are exploring that we've got
lots of great stuff coming out of that
but neuroscience is very different from
that you don't have neurons and the
connections between
cells you have parameters all the way
down the distribution of channels in the
membrane the biochemical cascades going
on inside the neurons all the way down
to the nucleus and where which genes are
getting expressed and so on there's a
million things that are changing
in real neurons and all of that is part
of the story of memory
um
so
short version
yeah the short version sounds crazy
complicated if you had to put a number
to where we're at in terms of
understanding exactly what is going on
in the brain are we at um two percent we
at 30 like how much do we understand
i i love the question but i think it's
impossible to put a number because you
can't until you know what 100 looks like
it's hard to know um i mean what's clear
is we are at the foot of the mountain
absolutely we know so little you know
camera frame mentioned before but in
2006 i wrote the uh the cover article in
discover magazine called
uh 10 unsolved questions of the brain
and what's fascinating to me is that
14 years later in 2020 they're all
exactly as unsolved as they were in 2006
um and so you know these are very basic
things like um why do brains sleep and
dream although hopefully we might have
made a little progress on that but you
know what is intelligence and we can
clearly measure it the iq test measures
something going on and it's correlated
with all kinds of things in life but we
don't know what intelligence is is it
the ability to squelch distractors or
generate new possibilities or you know
50 other hypotheses um what is
consciousness of course is a giant one
in neuroscience like how in the world do
you stick together 86 billion neurons
and you get something
like the redness of red or the taste of
feta cheese or the smell of cinnamon or
the beauty of a sunset like we don't
even have we don't even know
we don't have a starting point on this
kind of stuff there's so many questions
that um
so so that's why i know that we're at
the the very foot of the mountain and
it's funny because
science always goes like that where you
have to spend your life in something to
really recognize how little we how
little we know how how big the ocean is
out there because because you know if
when people
i don't know when they're freshmen or
something and they start with a
neuroscience textbook and they say wow
look it's an 800 page textbook full of
stuff we clearly know a lot about the
brain and of course things are written
to sort of act as though we know a lot
about the brain but
precisely because it's locked in this
armored bunker plating of the skull it's
been very hard to get at and we've been
building technologies to
see inside there better and better but
our best technologies are our brain
imaging is still very crude
um yeah
you can't imagine how many times i have
both thought of and quoted you talking
about how the brain is encased in total
darkness and silence that was one of
those sort of paradigm shift moments for
me where i realized because you know
given sort of my
penchant for science fiction and you
know me talking about doesn't matter
what you look at him as what you see and
the matrix comes up it's my favorite
movie of all time and so people ask you
know do you think that we're living in
the matrix and i don't and look i have
no reason to think we are we aren't but
the brain itself is creating a virtual
reality for you and that to me like
becomes very interesting and i'm
obsessed with this notion of what i call
the physics of being human which are
just like you every human sort of has
these right um
do you as a neuroscientist do you think
about sort of what the core functioning
elements of the brain like if there were
just a few things it's like the brain
does this you know whether that's um
process data or it you're an active
species and we're propelled towards
pleasure and away from pain like do you
have sort of a few key things that you
think really um define what it means to
be human
yeah i i think
well oh
definitely human is slightly different
sorry i was starting to answer the uh
what the brain is doing what the
principles are i'll take brains
okay i mean so this is essentially why i
wrote livewire because i felt like the
principles that i was thinking about are
not expressed anywhere so i wanted to
really make this argument that
what i think the brain is doing from its
dark control center is figuring out
what is the information coming in
through whatever senses you happen to
have what is information coming in how
do i correlate that what can i do with
that and then how can i drive this body
and of course those it's all in a
feedback loop so as soon as uh you know
something there's some signal over here
so then i generate the command to the
extra ocular muscles to look over there
and that gives me more information
because it puts that on the you know
high resolution photoreceptors at the
central vision and so on like there's
all this interaction between what i do
with motor output and input
and that i think is fundamentally what
the brain is doing and what i did is i
shored together
all of the data and all the arguments
about
how striking this is how good the brain
is
it's saying okay i'm going to drive
whatever kind of body i find myself in
doesn't matter
um and i'm going to figure out whatever
fused by that
um what do you what do you mean
yeah i'll give an example um
take take faith the dog which is this
dog who i saw once um who happened to be
born without front legs so she walks
bipedally on her back legs like a human
now one leg at a time or does she hop
um
she it's actually it's sort of both i
mean she goes one leg at a time then she
hops also she shows but and you can see
films of her online the thing is i
really that got me thinking like my god
could all dogs do this and almost
certainly all dogs could do it they just
they're not motivated enough to do it
it's presumably hard but she walks
around just fine on her back legs this
way
because
the important lesson here is dog brains
are not pre-programmed to drive dog
bodies instead they figure out oh i need
to get to the food over there i need to
get the one i need to get to my mother
like whatever i got to figure out how to
operate this this machinery and so it
just figures out what to do with it and
one of the examples yeah i mean because
you read the book he does near the end
of the book i give this
comparison of of the
the mars rover
so like you know take the mars rover
spirit which is a multi-billion dollar
piece of equipment we got it all the way
to the red planet it rolled around and
did its thing it did an awesome job and
then it got stuck with its right front
wheel and the martian soil and it died
and you compare that to a wolf who gets
his leg caught in a trap and it chews
its leg off and it figures out okay now
what do i do with three legs okay yeah
here's how i do it it figures out how to
walk on three legs why because it's
motivated because it has a yen for
survival and for getting to food and
getting back to its pack and all that
stuff and so it just figures out how to
rewire its machinery to get to drive
that new body and of course if you could
i mean one of my deep interests is how
can we build machines
starting now that take advantage of
what's going on in the world of
neuroscience and you know so you build a
mars rover that chews its [__] wheel
off and says okay now i'm gonna figure
out how to work with these other wheels
so that's the kind of thing that um
talk to me
you you go into this a little bit in the
book
how far off
are sort of nano robots and one of the
things oh god neural dust
that you talked about that i thought
what the [__] i've never heard of this
stuff how how real is it what's the
exciting stuff
yeah the whole the whole point of all
these is people are trying to figure out
how to get more information into and out
of the brain so as i said right now we
have fmri brain imaging it's really
crude like a voxel you know
three-dimensional pixel in the brain
you're measuring millions of neurons so
you say oh there's more activity here
but you're
you're not seeing the details of what's
going on so everyone's eager to figure
out how can we do this better so
obviously there's things like eeg also
extremely crude because they're all the
way on the outside of the skull
so you can stick electrodes in the brain
and actually measure what individual
neurons are doing you can also drive
them and this is what neural link is
doing it's just doing it at a higher
resolution there's nothing new about
what they're doing except they're sewing
the electrodes into the tissue so you
get higher resolution and it's wireless
the transmission
sorry i don't mean to say there's
nothing new about what they're doing
it's terrific it's tremendous but but
what i mean is you're just measuring the
activity but um what what other people
are trying to do for example with neural
dust
is put in a whole fleet of these very
tiny little transponders that float
around and stick on the uh you know
inside the skull but on the outside of
the brain
and each of them is measuring the
activity and can also put activity in
and so it's like having an eeg on the
outside but super high resolution
detailed on the inside get it there um
you the idea is you would just inject it
and you'd have to engineer it so it can
cross the blood-brain barrier to get
into the brain are we able i i don't
know what what size does something have
to be to cross a brain barrier
really small although possibly bigger
than you'd expect what what the what it
takes to cross the blood member is you
just need the right fedex labels on
these things you just need the right
labels that say oh yeah let me in okay
great it goes in so um and we can
manufacture things that small
good question uh possibly not at the
moment but in three years yes so this
group at berkeley has been working on
they're doing an awesome job what
they're doing right now is testing all
this in the peripheral nervous system
right now and the goal is to eventually
get it into the central nervous system
into the where the brain and spinal cord
are sitting
so are people injecting nano
robots for lack of a better word now
yeah now the neural dust isn't exactly
like a nano robot instead it's just a
tiny little transponder it just said it
says hey here's what i'm measuring and
it just sends that out wirelessly yes
that's being injected into living
organisms yes
i'm careful not to use that word but
that
right now yes right now they've been
doing that for a few years now actually
jesus yeah yeah
and what i propose in the book is a few
other methods by which we can
do this but it's all very far off but
what that would look like i think
instead of injecting electrodes i mean i
am super enthusiastic about what neural
link is doing but there are other
methods that wouldn't require drilling
holes all over the head and injecting
stuff in and that has to do with
you know actually
getting nano robots into the into the
brain tissue and by this i actually mean
little robots which are engineered to
you know swim and invade a neuron and
detect when there's big calcium influx
meaning the neural is just active and
then send out a signal and you probably
build it with a mesh network where each
little robot talks to other robots and
you get the signal out to the outside of
the brain that way and there are a lot
of
you know a lot of cool things that can
be done there you can also stick little
nano robots into the
blood vessels because your brain of
course is shot through with blood
vessels no one ever pays attention to
this but
i mean every cubic millimeter brain
tissue has has blood cells going to it
so you could uh blood vessels going to
so you could actually stick tiny tiny
robots in there so that they're sort of
listening to the electrical activity
just on the other side of the vessel
um
there are million things that need to be
solved there though like making sure
that you don't give the person a stroke
because of a of clogging something up
so anyway there's lots of future things
but what i think this means is that in
20 i mean i'll go ahead and put a number
down i think by 2040
there's no reason why we won't be able
to
to read and write from
a huge portion of the cells in the brain
to actually hear what's going on and
that is when neuroscience is actually
going to get really interesting because
right now we're all drumming up theories
and stuff based on very wispy data
that we have but once we can actually
read oh yeah here's what tom's 86
billion neurons are doing right now in
real time when i say this sentence or i
ask him to think about his uh you know
his mom or think about
whatever
like when we can actually measure that
and then do massive computational
analysis of that offline then we'll
start getting somewhere
whoa man that that starts to get really
really exciting when i think about
you know getting that real-time feedback
and obviously this stuff is going to
start with fixing problems you're not
going to get people trying to just talk
to their cell phone in the early days
but
i think that that is really really
exciting when you start thinking about
all the problems alzheimer's being one
that would be just extraordinary if we
could be in there and see
the early signs of things that you could
try a fix and actually see if it's
working you know so much of this is
either you're using a crude instrument
and thusly aren't getting great data or
there's something that can give you
relatively good data but it's expensive
or even just the assay of going in like
i remember at one point i had the
elasticity of my arteries
scanned using
ultra sound almost certainly and so
looking at arterial flexibility and
things like that and it's like
even i like i know that that exists i
know it's important but it's like ah you
know it's a pain in the ass find
somebody that'll do it go in and do it
um
but getting to the point where we could
get that kind of real-time diagnostic
feedback is
is really thrilling
oh yeah it's gonna change everything it
makes me feel like you know i mean i'm
i've spent my whole out of life working
my butt off in neuroscience but
sometimes i feel like my god if i could
just wait 20 years until that kind of
technology exists and then just say oh
yeah now we're just going to see what is
actually happening instead of
generating all the hypotheses about hey
maybe this may be that
uh it's just it's going to change the
field the field is going to
exponentially increase so rapidly at
that point
you know one thing i found interesting
with this concept of the brain is half
baked and it isn't specifically designed
you were you were mentioning dogs
specifically but you know
amputations and people remapping oh one
thing i can't remember if we talked
about this in the last one so for
anybody that's sort of doubling up on
these episodes if i'm repeating myself
forgive me but i find this so [__]
interesting um the the notion that
things like um the the
humongoid map homunculus whole monkey
homunculus yeah and that if i remember
right the genitals are right next to the
feet which may explain a foot fetish and
then um also that if you get an
amputated foot that the experience of an
orgasm will spill over
into the foot because it's you know
phantom limb and that the body is
basically remapping itself
as we look forward into the future
and
what what do you see as our ability to
augment the body like do you know who
hugh herr is
yeah yeah yeah [__] can sprint
all out with bionic or he has people
that can sprint all out with bionic legs
i can't remember if he was the one
actually doing it but i remember like
that [__] is crazy how far are we gonna
be able to push
physical augmentations for people that
have you know lost a limb
yeah so here's the thing so as you know
the argument i make is that
your brain will just figure out oh okay
you don't have that limit anymore fine
oh i i've attached this new thing great
fine and this is so stunning for example
they've done this in monkeys they
haven't done in humans yet but you can
get a monkey you hook up electrodes into
the the motor cortex in a monkey
and it can learn how to control a
robotic arm that is a third arm so it
can control its own arms and control a
third robotic arm with its motor cortex
it just figures out like oh this is how
i send commands here and that's how i
send commands there in humans they do
this with people who are paralyzed you
put an electrode array into the motor
cortex and they can't move their body at
all but they can control a robotic arm
beautifully i mean just smoothly and
beautifully and grab things and put
things in their own mouth and so on
so what this illustrates is
it's really not that hard for the brain
to figure out okay wait what commands do
i need to send and it's just like
learning how to ride a bicycle you know
you sort of think command and it does
the wrong thing and then you think it
again you try you get visual feedback
and eventually you can control it really
well
um
and so what i think is that this will
increasingly become the case as we get
ways of getting information into the
brain better and better starting with
neural link which is you know right now
in the context of what i just said it's
sort of a crude technology given the
idea of getting nano robots in their
something but the idea is um
we will
stop treating this as just our body but
having other things that are hooked up
to us that we can control with our
thoughts exactly as you control your leg
with your thoughts or you control your
arm with your thoughts it's not it's so
different it's just that you're saying
okay i want this to happen and then it
happens and so you know with the drone
you can do that the robot a hundred
miles away you can get a robot on the
moon
and i think you know if we could
who knows if we'd even want to but if
you could see society 500 or a thousand
years from now i think it's going to be
unrecognizable to us in terms of
people don't just think of this as their
self but they've got a self that's
that's greatly extended
all right i mean
go ahead
well i mean just look at when you drive
your car right you drive your car and
that kind of becomes all yourself
because you can control you're
controlling what happens with it so it
becomes an extension of you so just
imagine doing that
not with your hands like this but just
with your thoughts like that and
extended separate from you
that that to me is where this gets
exciting and so there's a button in
front of you and you can peek and see
what the world looks like in 5 000 years
do you press it
i would totally press it but i wouldn't
expect it i wouldn't expect it to be
a future that i am
um
that is recognizable or understandable
to me
i thought you were going to say
desirable because you seem
like you're worried about what you're
going to see
i don't even know if would be desirable
it would be yeah i mean it would be
undesirable in the sense that it
wouldn't make any sense to me it would
just be like it would be so foreign to
me that it's not clear that
i mean let's imagine a caveman got to
press the button and see 2020
and he sees us on skype and cell phones
and this and all the technology around
us
would it be desirable to him who the
heck knows it's just it's not even
understandable to him it's like god but
what about dancing around the campfire
and being with your girlfriend or what
whatever the thing
it's it's so different it's not clear
that it would have any real meaningful
relationship
um
yeah
it's interesting to me i push the button
with enthusiasm uh i think you're right
i think it will be
jarring in that it will be so devoid of
where we're at now and i think that
people would have a very hard time
making that leap because it's just it's
so different and and people fear like
relatively minor change so the notion of
what we would see which to me is almost
certainly not going to be biological so
you're going to flash forward because so
going back to hugh hur like looking at
so guy loses both of his legs in a
climbing accident ends up build
engineering his own replacements and
they're extraordinary when you see him
walk like i really want people to
imagine this when you see him walk with
pants and shoes on you cannot tell his
gate is [__] perfect you can't tell
that he's a double amputee he's got
people that are sprinting all out on on
not just the springy legs that you would
see um you know an olympic sprinters
who's a wmpt running on but like
legitimate they look like mechanical
legs like you would expect on a cyborg
and they are sprinting
it's crazy so when i think about okay it
starts with you're getting somebody sort
of back to normal functioning it very
quickly once you figure that one out
very quickly goes to adding i mean
you're already talking about adding you
know perception to people and giving
them additional senses like i think this
stuff is it's just going to push and
push and push and the coolest definition
of technology i've ever heard is
technology is hope for a better future
and that's it and that's why you can't
stop it this is why elon musk despite
trying to get everybody to back off ai
he just couldn't get them to see the
dangers because technology is the hope
of a better future so people think about
you know ai being able to save grandma
and you know being able to get rid of my
knee pain or you know whatever they're
fantasizing about
but it's that hope and so dude i i
really think barring catastrophe where
we press the button and it's just a
[__] world war three wasteland of
radioactive nothingness but barring that
like it i can't see us being biological
can you
we'll certainly be a lot less biological
i mean already we put in artificial
hearts you can do all kinds of
artificial parts of the body you can do
hue her type of prosthetics and so on
and yeah i think as we get
better and better into tapping in here
you'll have prosthetics that are not
physically attached to you but instead
attached by bluetooth or attached by the
internet on somewhere distant and so
yeah the notion of what it is to be a
human is
is different
um yeah and i think it's going to be
unrecognizable that way
sorry i'm stuck on this thing about hope
for a better future because you know as
you know i live up in silicon valley and
i feel like i wish it were that i feel
like more it's
i feel like it's
the
how do i put this it feels to me like
what can be done
is what gets done in technology and so
taking ai as an example is it that is it
that some young person is thinking i
have hope for a better future or is they
thinking hey wow i can make a lot of
money if i program this thing that looks
at tweets and whatever um
yeah that's the that's the question
i wish it would just about hope for a
better future as opposed to hope for
making a bunch of money to uh you know
by making some business that's plausible
uber for ice cream or whatever the thing
is that the next person's making
yeah this is a massive can of worms that
would be very interesting to have you
back at some point to to go through
because i am
i am keenly interested in
where the human mind goes where it
becomes pathological
because i am
i am a rabid capitalist i recognize
though the realities this is why i'm
obsessed with that notion of the physics
of being human because humans
metastasize it at both sides right so
you're going to metastasize whether
you're left-leaning you're going to
metastasize whether you're right-leaning
and there's sort of pathology in the
extremes and everything comes down to
that that friction and the reason that i
wrote the the comics called neon future
and the reason that i wrote it is i
wanted to explore
what that split looks like when you get
to camps of people that that really are
technology is a better future but it's
infused with people that are just
trying to make what they can make what
they can make for a quick buck then you
get people that are dogmatically in the
opposite direction and you know they're
saying no technology whatsoever and that
sort of push pull gives you something
that has i hope ethics in the middle and
you you get like wobbles for sure like
twitter to me seems like an obvious
[__] wobble can we just correct that
[__] real fast like people are cr like
it is a i would never go spend time on
twitter because the level of just like
unchecked
vitriol is so bizarre i don't understand
it so whatever makes people want to
steep in that that's a feeling i don't
enjoy so i'm just like yo i'm i'm i'm
out
don't don't count me in but
you know what i've been you know what
i've been wondering tom i'm curious what
your opinion is on this is what
to what degree
is the vitriol that we see on twitter
representative of what is going on the
reason i ask is because when i look at
you know i see some innocent tweet and
then someone on the left says something
insane someone on the right says
something saying back to the person on
the left and back and forth and and i
think like oh my god if this is actually
where society is sitting right now we
are about to have a lot of bloodshed and
it's really scary i mean i think we're
really on the verge of something awful
but then if i get away from twitter for
a while i feel like okay well maybe it's
not so bad but i'm trying to what's your
opinion on whether it's reflecting
something real or not i think it's
reflecting something real for the first
time in my life i feel like
the smorgasbord of options now has to
contain at least a small plate of civil
war like it is a possibility now i hope
people don't scoop of the bowl of civil
war i really hope that we can avoid it i
never thought i would speak a sort of
political social commentary word in my
life like it is not something i find
intrinsically interesting but for the
first time in my life i felt like a
coward for not speaking up and saying
hey like this if you want to know what
um the pathology looks like we're
officially there and it's like whatever
camp you're in like i i don't care um
both left and right seem like swear
words to me it's like you've got to
understand you you must instantly right
now fill your heart with love for the
other side and find a way to like meet
in a non-destructive place and look
that's my value system and i know not
everybody shares it but it's like it's
to me it's like a marriage you're you're
in the [__] marriage and so to me
when i got married i said i'm never
getting divorced i don't even make jokes
about divorce i'm not joking i don't
tease my wife about divorce i never say
i'm to leave you over that [__] nothing
not for a laugh not to win an argument
never [__] ever we call it the d word
if i were talking to my wife right now i
wouldn't even say divorce i would say
the d word because you just can't play
so it's like for me the the idea of
tipping over the table and saying [__]
society we'll start this over that is
patently madness and that that's like
the the nuclear option in a marriage
which i'm not saying that marriages
don't get to the point where it's really
[__] problematic that you have to
address it
and i'm not even saying abstract of
course in a marriage divorce is an
option if it gets so crazy but when when
you talk about actually shooting
somebody like that's where we gotta reel
this [__] back and we have to find a way
to to be like yo i have to co-exist with
these people and so this isn't about
being right this is about
functioning well as a non-violent
society
yeah well listen i am i mean i am with
you here and if we can
link arms with others who think like us
about how do we get people
to not play this insane game of there's
this issue about
what you can see having a point of view
requires having blind spots
and what we see all around us with the
left and right screaming at each other
is
you know i look at these threads going
back and forth and it's like they don't
understand what that person's trying to
say and that person doesn't understand
what that person is trying to say and it
really worries me and so i don't know if
you guys but i wrote an article in the
economist last year called
does your brain care about other people
it depends and what it's all about is
these experiments that i've done in my
lab about about empathy from the brain's
point of view like how your brain cares
about other people i might we might have
talked about this before but we i don't
think we have but this is so powerful
you got to walk people through it
okay great i'll great the short version
is we put people in the brain scanner
fmri and they see six hands on the
screen just just the hand
the computer
randomly picks a hand and you see that
hand gets stabbed with a syringe needle
and what happens is these pain areas in
your brain come online it's not your
hand getting stabbed in someone else's
hand but that is the neural basis of
empathy you are seeing someone else
saying good stuff and it feels awful to
you okay what we now do after we've
measured that a bunch of times is we now
add a one word label to each hand
christian jewish muslim scientologist
hindu atheist
the computer picks a hand you see the
hand gets stabbed the question is do you
give a [__] as much if it's not a member
of your in-group and the answer is you
do not give a [__] as much um and so
obviously we tested all types you know
christians muslim jews everybody
including by the way atheists atheists
have exactly the same thing they care
when they see other atheists hand get
stabbed they don't care as much about us
so it's not about it's not an indictment
of religion it's just about in groups
and out groups and who you
align with and so one of the things that
to my mind
was the most maybe fruitful or
interesting about this was we then
discovered that if we tell people okay
now the year is 2025 and these three
religions have teamed up against these
three religions
the computer obviously picks it randomly
for each subject but the key is now
whatever religion you are you have two
allies suddenly all this is a one word
sentence saying that you teamed up and
these are your allies and these are your
enemies
and now when you see your allies hands
get stabbed you don't sorry you care a
little bit more than you did about them
a minute ago because you're told they're
on your team and that's all it takes
so what this got me thinking about
was the iroquois native americans who
for years there were several tribes for
years they fought these bloody wars
and a leader came in who was known as
the great peacemaker i can't remember if
we ever talked about this last time or
something but the great peacemaker came
in and what he did
is he
said okay there are these different
tribes but i'm also going to assign
different clan membership to you so
within a tribe you belong to the bear
clan you belong to the elk clan you
belong to the beaver clan and so on and
that's cross cutting so now let's say
tom you and i belong to different tribes
warring tribes but we both happen to be
in the bear clan some like smart well i
can't i can't attack you guys because
we're because here's my bear brother
over here so
yeah it's this cross stitching anyway
it's a it's a really beautiful powerful
idea and what i'm trying to think of now
besides putting this out in articles and
economists trying to get people to read
this and think about this is how do we
actually implement this because i look
at these
people crazily screaming at each other
on the left and the right i think how
can we establish this cross-cutting
thing because telling people hey just
love one another that unfortunately is
insufficient
so so there's the that's the goal if
anybody listening to this has some ideas
about like okay look here's the way that
we do this cross stitching so that
everyone feels like okay yeah but you're
also from my hometown or you're also
whatever
i'm going to think about you a little
bit differently than i did a moment ago
that feels to me like the secret key
dude that's so powerful um that's the
whole thing about the physics of being
human
part of what i've written down is in
groups versus out groups or
us versus them
it is innate to the species
i think that's a very interesting
solution
we'll end it on that i think that's so
brilliant and such a great idea um
there's so much more i could go into
dude i love spending time with you thank
you
for coming on the show
terrific thanks tom awesome to see you
again absolutely guys if you're not
already following david reading his
books everything like this guy has
taught me so much about the brain i
can't even tell you um be sure to read
the new book live wired it is [__]
phenomenal and speaking of things that
are phenomenal if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
in the medical landscape you know we go
we get our blood pressure tested we get
all kinds of things tested but what's
happening under the hood we never get
tested like how are you doing
cognitively
you